{"FAMILY": " Agaricaceae, Order Agaricales, Class Agaricomycetes, Phylum Basidiomycota\n", "LATIN NAME(S)": " Vascellum lloydianum  A.H. Sm.^  Bull. Soc. Linn. de Lyon 15 fevrier 1974 p.410\n", "ENGLISH NAME(S)": " western lawn puffbowl, western lawn puffball\n", "NOTES": " Features of Vascellum lloydianum include 1) a top-shaped or depressed-spherical fruitbody with a narrowed base, 2) an outer layer white when young, with soft spines that are often joined at the top in groups of 3-5, with smaller spines and granules in between, all falling away by maturity, 3) an inner layer that is smooth, grayish and shiny, with a wide, often lobed opening, 4) a spore mass that is white at first, becoming yellow-olivaceous to light brownish olive and powdery, 5) sterile base occupying the lower half of the fruitbody with large chambers, white when young but brownish to purplish when mature, when old separated from the spore mass by a line, (the sterile persisting as an urn shape after spore dispersal), 6) attachment to the substrate by small pad of dirt and mycelium or by a rhizomorph, 7) spores that are round or nearly round, showing minute warts under oil immersion, and 8) other microscopic characters.^ The description is derived from Smith(39) except where noted. Vascellum lloydianum is close to Vascellum pratense and has been regarded as a synonym, so that Pacific Northwest records of Vascellum pratense may be the same species as Vascellum lloydianum even if the two are different species. The close but not identical relationship is supported in the molecular study of Jarvis(1). Both species (or the one species if they are the same) may be better placed in Lycoperdon. The current name of Vascellum pratense in the online Species Fungorum, accessed March 31, 2018 was Lycoperdon pratense but MycoBank, accessed the same day, gave the current name as Vascellum pratense. The master\u2019s thesis of Jarvis(1) combines Vascellum lloydianum provisionally as Lycoperdon lloydianum. By whatever name Vascellum lloydianum is fairly common in the Pacific Northwest. RANGE The holotype of Vascellum lloydianum is from WA. It has been known by several other names: Lycoperdon depressum Bonorden, Vascellum depressum (Bon.) F. Smarda, Calvatia depressa (Bon.) Zeller & Smith, (Zeller(13) who examined a collection from OR and said it was common in the Pacific Coast states), and Vascellum pratense (Pers.: Pers.) Kreisel, with which some authors synonymize the four other names, or the last three of the four. A.H. Smith differentiates Vascellum lloydianum A.H. Sm. from V. pratense (see SIMILAR), using collections from WA and giving range as \"grassy areas west of the Great Plains, especially in the Pacific Northwest\", while giving the range of Vascellum pratense (Pers.) Kreisel as \"Asia, Europe, possibly rarely in eastern North America\". The same taxon (or one very close) is recorded from CA (Arora(1)). Vascellum lloydianum has been collected in AZ (Bates). Jarvis(1) examined both L. vascellum and L. 'lloydianum' from CA for her master's thesis. There are collections labeled Vascellum pratense from British Columbia at the University of British Columbia. \n", "CHEMICAL REACTIONS": " \n", "OUTER SURFACE": " 1.5-5cm across, 2-4(6)cm high, depressed-spherical to bowl-shaped or top-shaped when mature, outer layer in the form of soft spines often united at the top in groups of 3-5, \"with smaller spines and granules in the spaces between the groups, all of this falling away by late maturity\", (Smith), \"white, then pale ochraceous buff or flesh pinkish, becoming shades of olivaceous or finally a dark shining metallic brownish where the inner peridium is exposed\", (Zeller)\n", "INNER LAYER": " \"smooth, grayish, rather shiny\", with a wide, often lobed, opening at the top of the fruitbody\n", "SPORE MASS": " \"white and soft when young, becoming yellow-olivaceous then changing to light brownish olive and becoming powdery at maturity\"\n", "STEM": "", "": " attached by a small pad of dirt and mycelium or by a rhizomorph; sterile base \"in section prominent, of large chambers, white when young but brownish to purplish at maturity\", often occupying the lower half of the fruitbody, when old separated from the spore mass by a line (an apparent diaphragm), no diaphragm evident in fruitbodies just reaching maturity\n", "ODOR": " \n", "TASTE": " \n", "EDIBILITY": "  \n", "HABITAT": " in grassy areas\n", "SPORE DEPOSIT": "  \n", "MICROSCOPIC": " spores 3.5-4.5(5) x 3.5-4.5(5) microns, round or nearly round, smooth in optical section but minutely verrucose under oil, tawny in Melzer's reagent, \"pale tan to olivaceous or finally argillaceous in KOH\", \"often with a stub of a pedicel up to 5 microns long\"^; eucapillitium \"scant, threads 3-5 microns wide, present in the area adjacent to the endoperidium and arising from it, walls undulating to parallel, slightly thickened, ochraceous to brown in KOH, unpitted, tapered to acute apices\", the tapered part often crooked as in Lycoperdon, paracapillitium abundant, threads 2-6.6 microns wide, colorless, \"thin-walled, septate, branched sparingly, seldom fragmented, smooth or with some adhering debris\"; exoperidium of colorless pseudoparenchyma \"giving rise to heaps and cones of similar hyphae or cones formed of hyphal fasciles [?fascicles] with the cells globose to versiform, but the hyphal structure typically obscure\"; endoperidium of \"thick-walled tubular hyphae matted into a layer and many of the hyphae developing colored walls, hyphae 2-7 microns thick, lumen often narrow or obscured; no mycosclerids observed\", (Smith)\n", "NAME ORIGIN": " from Latin meaning \"of fields\", from habitat^, (Lincoff(1))\n", "SIMILAR": " Vascellum pratense (Pers.) Kreisel (Lycoperdon pratense Pers. according to the online Species Fungorum, accessed January 24, 2015) is similar. 1) It has the lower part of the endoperidium with rare hyphae with thick colored walls (V. lloydianum having the lower portion of endoperidium with numerous hyphae with thick, colored walls, some of which extend into the spore mass as eucapillitial threads). 2) V. pratense also has a well developed diaphragm between spore mass and sterile base (poorly developed to absent in V. lloydianum). 3) spores are \"punctate to minutely warty\" (in V. lloydianum \"subsmooth\" or \"smooth in optical section but surface minutely verruculose under oil\"). (Smith(39)). Ramsey reports a collection from the University of Washington campus that fits at least the macroscopic description of V. pratense better than that of V. lloydianum, (Ramsey(1)). L. pratense and L. lloydianum \"are very similar in outward appearance, which can cause confusion and misidentification among them. Lycoperdon pratense has non-poroid eucapillitium that is scarce to absent, and can be found only along the endoperidium wall in mature gasterocarps, as long as gleba tissue is still present. As well, Lycoperdon pratense has a wide and very well developed diaphragm that can be seen earlier in development than that in Lycoperdon lloydianum (Ponce de Leon 1970, Bates 2004). Both of these grassland species have been collected together in the same habitat. Close examination of the diaphragm and growth of the eucapillitium is necessary for proper treatment of these species.\" (Jarvis(1) with Latin names italicized). Lycoperdon species do not have the thin papery membrane that separates the sterile base from the spore mass in Vascellum species, (Trudell).\n", "SOURCES": "  Smith(39) (as Vascellum lloydianum), Zeller(13) (as Calvatia depressum), Arora(1), Ramsey(1), Lincoff(1), Trudell(4), Bates(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Jarvis(1)\n"}