LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus edulis  var. grandedulis  D. Arora & Simonini  Econ. Bot. 62(3): 374. 2008
ENGLISH NAME(S)  California king bolete
NOTES  Var. grandedulis is similar to typical (European) Boletus edulis but larger and with a brown to cinnamon pore surface when mature, (Arora(2)). This variety is abundant "in the fall and winter (and occasionally spring) from San Luis Obispo County in central California north along the coast to Mendocino County and beyond, and fruiting during the summer and fall in the Sierra Nevada and other mountain ranges", (Arora(2)). The description is derived from Arora(2) except where noted. RANGE Boletus edulis var. grandedulis was described from CA and has been reported from the Pacific Northwest (e.g. Siegel(2) - see HABITAT.). Daniel Winkler has reported var. grandedulis from WA.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  10-50cm across or more, "convex or bun-shaped in most stages"; "whitish soon becoming pale brown or brown or often deep reddish-brown as it matures, or yellow-brown in dry weather (often yellowest at margin)"; "viscid when moist", "smooth or wrinkled"
FLESH  in both cap and stem "thick, firm, white, not staining when cut (or rarely blueing slightly just above the tube layer)"
PORES  pore surface "whitish when young, becoming tan or slightly yellower as it matures and then becoming distinctly brown to cinnamon or even reddish at maturity", not blueing when bruised "but may stain slightly brownish"; "tube layer olive-yellow or olive when mature"
STEM  up to 40cm or more long and up to 15cm wide, "often massive", "often bulbous when young", clavate (club-shaped) to more or less equal when old; "typically white at first, remaining white or becoming pale brown to brown" when old; upper part "covered with a fine white reticulum when young, the reticulum sometimes obscure in age and at other times conspicuous and extending nearly to the base"
ODOR  mild or pleasant
TASTE  mild or pleasant
EDIBILITY  
HABITAT  in California, single to gregarious in coastal pine forests and at their edges, less commonly associated with live oaks, "and found at mid-to-high elevations in the Sierra Nevada" with pine and true fir, (Arora(2)), Siegel(2) say in the California context that it occurs in various coniferous forests, especially under Monterey Pine and Bishop Pine, also Shore Pine on the Far North Coast, into the Pacific Northwest. They also mention that it occasionally associates with live oak and madrone, more rarely with Valley Oak. (Siegel(2))
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive-brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores (12)13-15.5(17) x (3.8)4-5.5(6) microns, "fusiform to subellipsoid" (spindle-shaped to somewhat elliptic), smooth; basidia 2-spored, 3-spored, or 4-spored, clavate; hymenial cystidia "inconspicuous, fusoid-ventricose"; cap cuticle "an often gelatinized trichodermium of interwoven hyphae with irregular, often diverticulate end cells" measuring 34-52 x 6-10 microns
NAME ORIGIN  "grand" means "large" and "edulis" refers to Boletus edulis
SIMILAR  
SOURCES  Arora(2)*, Siegel(2)*
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus 'ferrugineus'  Schaeff.  Fung. bavar. palat. nasc. (Ratisbonae) 1: 85, tab. 4. 1762;  Boletus 'spadiceus'  Fr.;  Boletus oregonensis  (Murrill) Murrill  (possible valid name for local species);  Xerocomus oregonensis  (possible combination for local species)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  Features include 1) a dry, velvety brown to reddish brown cap, 2) white flesh that is unchanging or turning slowly blue near the tubes or in the stem, 3) angular yellow pores that turn blue, 4) a pale yellow to whitish stem that is often reticulate, and 5) a cap surface that discolors blue to blue-green when ammonium hydroxide is applied. The description here is for the type variety of Boletus spadiceus. Boletus 'ferrugineus' is similar to the commoner Xerocomus subtomentosus group (see SIMILAR). B. 'ferrugineus' is not common in the Pacific Northwest. RANGE Boletus 'ferrugineus' has been reported as Boletus 'spadiceus' from WA, OR, ID (Thiers 1986 pers. comm. to Lorelei Norvell), and has appeared on foray lists from WA and ID. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  cap cuticle blue then fuscous with NH4OH, cap cuticle dark brown with KOH, flesh orange-yellow with KOH, (Thiers), cap cuticle green to bluish green then fuscous then reddish brown with NH4OH, no reaction on cap, flesh or stem with FeSO4, (Smith)
CAP  4-10cm, convex to flat-convex; brown to reddish brown, when old usually becoming dark brown or fading to pale yellow brown, often retaining a reddish tint and appearing dark reddish brown when wet; dry, dull, velvety to subtomentose [somewhat tomentose] to tomentose, (Thiers), 5-11cm wide, convex becoming broadly convex or nearly flat; "dark olive to olive-yellow with reddish tints, yellow-brown, reddish brown, or date-brown"; dry, velvety-tomentose, sometimes cracked when old, (Bessette)
FLESH  1-1.5cm thick, pale vinaceous near cap surface and yellow above tubes, otherwise white, unchanged when exposed or slowly blue near tubes; in stem "white to pale yellow, unchanging or slowly changing to blue when exposed", (Thiers), pale yellow, unchanging or turning blue slightly when bruised, turning bright yellow then pinkish around larval tunnels, (Bessette)
PORES  1-2mm, often compound, angular; yellow, changing to blue when bruised or exposed; tube layer 1-1.5cm thick, depressed to subdecurrent, colored and changing as pores, (Thiers), 1-2mm, angular; yellow to olive-yellow, often but not always staining blue or blue-green when bruised; tube layer 0.8-1cm thick, (Bessette)
STEM  5-15cm x 1-2cm at top, equal or narrowing toward base, solid; pale yellow to buff to occasionally almost white, sometimes with brownish stains; dry, often coarsely reticulate in top part, smooth to longitudinally ridged toward base, (Thiers), 4-10cm x 1-2.5cm, nearly equal but often narrowing downward, solid; "mostly yellow or paler, sometimes with brownish stains but never red", typically whitish at base; sometimes with raised longitudinal lines forming a partial reticulum at the top or nearly overall; often with yellow basal mycelium; partial veil and annulus absent, (Bessette), "pallid over apical part at first, pruinose with brownish to reddish pruina, sometimes with coarse longitudinal ridges or obscurely widely reticulated", (Smith)
ODOR  mild (Thiers), mild to slightly pungent (Bessette)
TASTE  mild (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  yes (Bessette)
HABITAT  "in groups on the ground in mixed woods and under conifers, along road banks and trails", (Bessette)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark olive brown (Thiers), olive to pale olive brown (Bessette)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 9-11 x 4-5.5 microns, subfusoid to subelliptic [somewhat spindle-shaped to somewhat elliptic], smooth, pale ochraceous in KOH and Melzer's, thin-walled; basidia 4-spored, 20-30 x 4-6 microns, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia numerous, conspicuous, projecting, 40-55 x 4-7 microns, clavate to fusoid to fusoid-ventricose, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle "differentiated as a trichodermium of suberect to tangled to repent hyphal tips, irregularly incrusted, ochraceous in KOH, rust red in Melzer's"; clamp connections absent, (Thiers), spores 10-14 x 4.5-5 microns, oblong to ventricose [wider in middle], smooth, pale brown; "hymenial cystidia not furcate; hymenophoral trama lacking a strong, fleeting amyloid reaction", (Bessette), spores (9)11-14 x 4.5-5 microns, oblong to ventricose, (Smith)
NAME ORIGIN  means 'date-colored'
SIMILAR  Xerocomus subtomentosus group is similar but the cap does not discolor blue to blue-green when ammonium hydroxide is applied: B. 'spadiceus' [treated here as a synonym of Boletus 'ferrugineus'] often has more reddish pigment in the cap and typically appears reddish brown when wet, (Thiers). See also SIMILAR section of Xerocomellus 'diffractus'.
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus spadiceus), Bessette(3)* (as Boletus spadiceus), Arora(1) (as Boletus spadiceus), Smith(35) (as Boletus spadiceus)
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus fibrillosus  Thiers  California Mushrooms pp.45-46. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  fib king
NOTES  Features include dark brown to chestnut brown, dry, fibrillose cap, yellow pores, and brown reticulate stem. RANGE The description is derived from Thiers except where indicated. Boletus fibrillosus is "recorded from the Pacific Coast of California and the Cascades, distribution limits yet to be established" (Bessette). The type is from CA. There are collections from WA and OR at the University of Washington. Paul Kroeger says Boletus fibrillosus appeared in quantity in BC about 2004, and a collection from 2005 in BC is at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  cap cuticle red to pink with application of KOH
CAP  6-17cm, convex becoming flat-convex to broadly convex to flat with flared margin, margin incurved at first; brown to dark brown, occasionally with paler buff spots; dry, even or somewhat wrinkled, typically tomentose to velvety, becoming fibrillose, sometimes fibrillose-scaly on disc, (Thiers), "brown, cinnamon-brown to chestnut-brown, or dark brown, sometimes with buff-colored spots", (Bessette), "some shade of dark brown, often with lighter areas"; "typically wrinkled and velvety to distinctly fibrillose", (Trudell)
FLESH  1.5-3cm thick, soft, floccose [cottony]; white to pale buff, unchanging when exposed, in stem white, unchanging when exposed
PORES  1-2 per mm, angular; light yellow when young, dark yellow when old, unchanging; tube layer 1.5-2.5cm thick, "narrowly and shallowly depressed" around stem, colored as pores, unchanging or darkening slightly when bruised, (Thiers), light yellow or somewhat darker, tubes similar in color, (Trudell), pale yellow to yellow or dingy olive-yellow (occasionally pallid when very young), (Arora)
STEM  10-16cm x 2-3cm, equal to club-shaped, rarely narrowing downward, often pinched at base, solid; pale yellow at top, otherwise light brown to brown; dry to moist, reticulate [netted] over most parts, white basal mycelium, (Thiers), long relative to cap, often pinched off at base; pale at top, dark brown in lower part; strongly reticulate, covered by mycelium at base, (Trudell), 8-16cm x 2-4cm, usually lined or fibrillose, reticulate at least at top, (Arora)
ODOR  mild
TASTE  mild
EDIBILITY  unknown (Thiers), edible but inferior to B. edulis (Trudell)
HABITAT  single to scattered in soil in dense mixed coastal forests, (Thiers), in dense mixed coastal forests or in conifer woods (Bessette), in old growth forests of Abies (fir) and Tsuga heterophylla (Western Hemlock), earlier succession forests of T. heterophylla and Pseudotsuga menziesii (Douglas-fir) and other mixed forest stands, (Trudell)
SPORE DEPOSIT  dark olive-brown
MICROSCOPIC  spores 13-17.5 x 3.5-5.5 microns, subfusoid [somewhat spindle-shaped] to ventricose [wider in middle], smooth, pale ochraceous in Melzer's, pale yellow to colorless in KOH, moderately thick-walled; basidia 4-spored, 35-40 x 8-12 microns, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia scattered, inconspicuous, 38-46 x 6-8 microns, subcylindric to fusoid-ventricose with elongated apices, colorless, thin-walled; cap cuticle differentiated as a trichodermium of hyphae have +/- equal cells; stem cuticle differentiated as a layer of fertile basidia and caulocystidia, which are colorless, subcylindric to clavate, abundant on edges of reticulum
NAME ORIGIN  means 'fibrillose'
SIMILAR  Boletus edulis has a smooth to wrinkled or pitted (not fibrillose) cap that is lighter in color and slippery to viscid when wet, white tubes when young, and a stem that is lighter in color, (Thiers). See also SIMILAR section of 'Boletus' mirabilis and Boletus mottiae.
SOURCES  Thiers(1), Bessette(3)*, Trudell(4)*, Arora(1)*, Desjardin(6)*, Siegel(2)*
LATIN NAME(S)  'Boletus' mirabilis  (Murrill) Murrill  Mycologia 4: 217. 1912;  Boletellus mirabilis (Murrill) Singer  Farlowia 2: 129. 1945;  Xerocomus mirabilis  (Murrill) Singer;  Aureoboletus mirabilis (Murrill) Halling  in Halling, Fechner, Nuhn, Osmundson, Soytong, Arora, Binder & Hibbett,  Aust. Syst. Bot. 28: 19. 2015 (proposed new name)
ENGLISH NAME(S)  admirable bolete, bragger's bolete
NOTES  Features of this common bolete include 1) plush maroon brown cap, 2) stem of similar color, often with roughened longitudinal ridges reminiscent of bark, sometimes netted near the top, 3) yellow pores that do not stain blue, and 4) growth on or near rotting conifers. A whitish then yellow stage of the pyrenomycete Hypomyces chrysospermum frequently grows on it. According to Desjardin(6), molecular data indicate that Boletus mirabilis does not belong to Boletus or Boletellus but may be closer to Aureoboletus. The Aureoboletus name is proposed in Halling(6) in press. RANGE 'Boletus' mirabilis is common in WA and OR and also found in northern CA, (Thiers), ID (Drew Parker, pers. comm.), MT (Larry Evans, pers. comm.), and MI (Arora). It is also common in BC and there are collections at the University of British Columbia.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  
CAP  5-15(20)cm, convex to flat, margin often hung with fragments of tissue; dark reddish brown to maroon-brown, bay-brown, or chocolate-brown; moist to dry, granular to plush-like (with small often erect fibrillose scales), (Arora), 7-15cm, convex to bluntly convex becoming broadly convex to flat-convex, margin often with hanging remnants; dark reddish brown; "moist to lubricous when young, dry when older, somewhat appressed fibrillose-scaly to rough-tomentose when young, becoming conspicuously fibrillose-scaly and often squarrose-scaly with age", sometimes granular-scaly to somewhat areolate [cracked like dried mud] or cracked-scaly, (Thiers)
FLESH  thick; "white to dingy pinkish or yellow, rarely blueing when bruised", (Arora), 1-2cm thick, white to yellow, frequently with numerous areas staining flesh-colored when older, rarely changing to blue in irregular areas, in stem pale vinaceous, sometimes appearing yellow and typically becoming yellow when dry, (Thiers)
PORES  1-2 mm wide, pale yellow becoming mustard yellow and finally greenish yellow, sometimes staining darker yellow when bruised; tubes yellow, (Arora), 1-2 mm wide, round to angular; yellow becoming olive yellow when old, unchanging or becoming deeper yellow when bruised; tube layer 1-2.5cm thick, depressed around stem, colored as pores, unchanging when bruised, (Thiers)
STEM  7-20cm x 1-3.5cm, usually club-shaped, firm; dark brown to maroon-brown or reddish brown, "sometimes with yellow, buff, or beige streaks"; "often roughened, pitted, or longitudinally ridged", the top often coarsely reticulate [netted], the base often with yellow mycelium , (Arora), 8-15cm x 1-3cm, club-shaped, up to 5cm wide at base, solid; dark brown with occasional steaks of ivory or beige or brown; moist to dry, bald, but typically shaggy reticulate at top, "becoming smooth to uneven or ridged or shallowly pitted toward base, sometimes roughened and split with age", with yellow mycelium at base, (Thiers), partial veil and annulus absent (Bessette)
ODOR  acid or mild (Thiers), pleasant (Phillips)
TASTE  not distinctive (Thiers), pleasant (Phillips)
EDIBILITY  choice (Thiers), delicious, some have a distinct lemony flavor, avoid specimens attacked by Hypomyces, (Arora)
HABITAT  single or in small groups "on or near rotting conifers, (especially hemlock), but sometimes appearing terrestrial", (Arora), single to scattered in soil in coastal forests, typically with hemlock logs and stumps, (Thiers), summer and fall (Miller)
SPORE DEPOSIT  olive brown (Arora, Thiers)
MICROSCOPIC  spores 18-24 x 7-9 microns, spindle-shaped to elliptic, smooth, (Arora), spores 18-22 x 7-9 microns, subfusoid to subelliptic, smooth, dark brown in Melzer's, ochraceous in KOH, thick-walled; basidia 4-spored, 31-36 x 7-11 microns, clavate, colorless; hymenial cystidia scattered to numerous, 60-90 x 10-18 microns, fusoid-ventricose with obtuse to elongated apices, colorless, thin-walled; clamp connections absent, (Thiers)
LATIN NAME(S)  Boletus mottiae  Thiers  California Mushrooms p.36. 1975
ENGLISH NAME(S)  
NOTES  It is possible that at least the holotype of the species is a variation of Boletus regineus. The outstanding character is the strongly reticulated or ridged cap surface, other features include a moist to subviscid brown cap, white unchanging flesh, angular white pores that become yellow to greenish yellow but do not change when bruised, buff to pinkish buff stem that is finely reticulate over entire surface, and microscopic characters. RANGE Boletus mottiae was described by Thiers as Boletus mottii, but since the person after whom it was named was a woman, "mottiae" is correct. The species was described from CA. It has been reported from WA (J. Lindgren, pers. comm., M. Beug, pers. comm.) and there is a collection by J. Ammirati at the University of Washington. There is a collection from BC at the Pacific Forestry Centre. It has also been reported from OR (H. Thiers 1986 pers. comm. to L. Norvell), and appears on an Idaho foray list.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS  cap surface and flesh do not stain with the application of KOH or FeSO4
CAP  6-12cm, convex, expanding, sometimes as far as shallowly depressed; brown ("cinnamon" to "cinnamon brown" Ridgway colors) on the disc, fading to buff toward the margin; moist to subviscid, "conspicuously wrinkled-reticulate over entire surface during all stages of development, the reticulum noticeable raised on the disc, but sometimes becoming shallower and may eventually appear as appressed fibrillose scales on the very margin", the reticulations remain very pronounced on dried caps and are usually darker than intervening areas, (Thiers), pitted and/or ridged cap (Arora)
FLESH  1-2cm thick, soft; white, unchanging when exposed, the same in the stem (Thiers)
PORES  up to 1mm broad, angular, white when young, becoming yellow to greenish yellow when mature, unchanging when bruised; tube layer 0.5-1cm thick, depressed, colored as pores and unchanging when bruised, (Thiers)
STEM  5-7.5cm x 1.5-3cm at top, equal to subclavate [somewhat club-shaped], solid; buff to pinkish buff during all stages of development; "dry, finely reticulate over entire surface", reticulations colored as surface, "reticulations suggestive of those of B. edulis but more delicate", (Thiers) 
ODOR  not distinctive (Thiers)
TASTE  not distinctive (Thiers)
EDIBILITY  unknown (Thiers)
HABITAT  type was found under conifers (Thiers), fall
SPORE DEPOSIT  unknown
MICROSCOPIC  spores 14.3-17.1 x 3.8-5.2 microns, cylindric to subelliptic [somewhat elliptic] in face view, ventricose and inequilateral in side view, smooth, pale ochraceous in KOH, slightly darker in Melzer's reagent, thin-walled; basidia 2-spored and 4-spored, 23-30 x 7-10 microns, clavate, colorless in KOH; hymenial cystidia not seen when specimen revived in KOH; cap cuticle "subgelatinous, up to 500 microns broad, well differentiated as a somewhat tangled to suberect trichodermium, hyaline in KOH, not staining in Melzer's, terminal hyphae septate with terminal cells ovoid to clavate, 20-40 x 10-20 microns, subterminal cells more elongate to ellipsoid, walls sometimes incrusted, cross walls inamyloid, hyphae 3-7 microns wide"; stem cuticle "a layer of fertile basidia with scattered, fusoid to clavate to fusoid-ventricose caulocystidia"; clamp connections not seen, (Thiers)
NAME ORIGIN  after Lillian Mott
SIMILAR  Boletus mottiae is distinguished from members of Boletus edulis complex by the strongly reticulated or ridged surface of the cap of B. mottiae. When compared with B. edulis, cap color is different, and reticulum on stem is of B. mottiae is much more delicate, (Thiers). Boletus fibrillosus (cap surface remotely suggestive of that of B. mottiae) has yellow tubes when young, a rather elongated stem, and a much darker colored cap, (Thiers).
SOURCES  Thiers(1) (as Boletus mottii), Bessette(3)*, Arora(1)
